> **Markdown help:** See [markdown-guide.md](../pages/markdown-guide.md) for formatting tips and a reflection template.

# Week 13 Reflection

Reflect 13: Do we imagine AI futures as utopian, dystopian, or something in between? What do those visions reveal about us?

AI futures are often portrayed as either utopian or dystopian, however the more real, more meaningful imagined futures generally fall somewhere in the middle. Utopian imaginings picture AI as a helpful machine, capable of solving humanity's greatest problems: a machine to cure diseases, eradicate poverty and climate change, handle dangerous work and offer equitable access to knowledge and education. Dystopian imaginings depict AI as a threat, an instrument of enhanced surveillance, unemployment, inequality, environmental devastation and diminished human control. In either extreme there are truths but in either alone the whole picture of how AI is actually evolving is lost. Future AI will be less about the nature of the technology and more about the nature of the politics, economies, social structures and values that humans chose to create and implement that technology with. These imaginings of AI futures are not really about machines alone, but about humans-it's about their fears and hopes, their existing power structures, their morality and their value judgments, of right now. Utopian futures of AI operate from the assumption that technological advancement always improves human life. In these futures AI automates all the mundane and repetitive work leaving humanity with time for more artistic, more social, more meaningful activities and interactions. AI powered health diagnoses are more accurate than human doctors', education can be personalized to individual needs, and government policies and resource allocation can become hyper-efficient. In these visions AI will become an almost God-like extension of human potential, overcoming every existing limitation of humanity. Technology companies have promoted such images extensively, describing AI as a tool that can increase innovation, productivity, and global connectivity. This optimistic framing reveals our fundamental hope for a easier, less demanding and more secure world; a hope for alleviation from exhausting work and unjust social inequalities, and for a brighter, more optimistic future. Imagined AI futures in which the technology has provided solutions to a number of difficult social problems have a deeply human desire for relief, perhaps even compensation for past human failings at creating functional political and social systems. These stories are also built on a foundation of faith in science and human ingenuity as forces for progress. Humanity tends to rely on dreams of utopian futures when faced with instability because they want an indication that humanity has a future that it wants. However, utopian narratives of AI have several flaws: they largely ignore how technological advancement is not distributed equitably, they make the implicit assumption that AI technology will be used for the collective good in a morally just way even though current technology is inherently embedded with existing societal biases, and they over simplify the power dynamics that determine technology’s application. The production of AI itself is not even as ethereal as many people think: we ignore the miners who extract rare earth materials to build AI hardware, the warehouse workers who maintain data centers, and the data labelers who feed the algorithms that power AI in some cases with very little pay and difficult working conditions. We also ignore the real impact that large AI systems are having on the environment due to their excessive use of energy, water, and computing resources. The truly utopian futures that companies want us to believe in rarely account for any of this and are therefore less about the technology, and more about selling us a dream. Dystopian futures offer the polar opposite of utopian ones, picturing a future dominated by mass surveillance, autonomous weapons, widespread unemployment and inequality, a flood of misinformation, and the overall erosion of personal autonomy. These narratives are often depicted as a direct threat to humanity, either through out of control technology or because governments and corporations are using AI technology to effectively control the human population. In these imagined worlds humans are not in control of their technology and are losing their personal autonomy and deep human connection due to the invasive and ever-watchful eye of artificial intelligence systems. AI essentially serves as a tool for individuals in power to surveil every element of humanity's existence and manipulate human behavior through personalized content and information streams. The reasons behind these fears of future dystopias are clearly related to a multitude of current problems, including governmental and corporate power in terms of surveillance, economic inequality, and the manipulation of data by certain groups for political gain; and a growing loss of trust in official sources of information and difficulty in discerning truth from fiction online. This also speaks to fears of human de-humanization: As our machines get smarter, is humanity's creativity, individuality, and empathy becoming less valuable? More disturbingly, many of the dystopian futures of AI are not wholly fiction. Systems like facial recognition have already been employed for widespread surveillance, algorithms are being used to promote misinformation and deepen societal divides due to the fact that engaging and polarizing content generates more clicks. The fear of unemployment by machines remains a very real fear for workers in almost every field. These truths are the cause of many people's dystopian view of AI futures rather than just fear of machines themselves; however some dystopias go too far: They sometimes frame AI as inherently evil or having a consciousness. In truth, humans are the architects of AI. What an AI is or is not is directly related to its creators’ programming and moral standing; the machine itself is nothing but code, without sentience or moral compasses. When people blame AI for their own woes, they are ignoring human involvement and power. Fear based narratives have also, on occasion, left individuals feeling helpless, thinking that their futures are beyond their control. This is, understandably, damaging to human empowerment. As stated above, the most realistic visions of AI futures are actually between utopia and dystopia; it would be a disservice to say AI offers no potential to improve lives but it would be naive to say it has no potential to be used to improve humanity’s existing problems. This means that AI technology, while capable of being an incredibly useful tool for healing, for communication and for education, simultaneously holds potential to further environmental degradation and economic disparity, as well as diminish personal autonomy. Our futures of AI have two sides. The first reveals our profound desire for progress and security; the second displays our anxiety at our own capacity for selfishness and destructiveness. AI represents what we want to become as well as what we are already. AI futures challenge our sense of identity: what exactly makes us human and distinct from the machine? The thought of a machine generating novel artwork, intelligent and coherent prose, or composing its own unique music leads many to believe they cannot possibly claim what they do as solely "human endeavors anymore. What defines us as human is emotionality, morality, creativity, consciousness, relationships, and experience. These machines push people to question whether creativity and intelligent work can still be exclusively human enterprises and push us to reconsider the importance of empathy, ethic, and our human experiences indefining what makes us human. Environmental factors are also part of our imagined futures. Much of our enthusiasm about AI revolves around increased efficiency and innovative capabilities without considering how enormous energy consumption or resource allocation will impact the Earth. We must consider our impact, otherwise AI will simply be part of our ever-growing destructive patterns; however, humanity can be creative, innovative and productive without harming itself and other organisms; if it chooses to apply its intelligence and creative resources wisely. The answer is that humanity does not need to accept either utopia or dystopia as the fate of AI. Instead, it needs to consciously shape the development and use of AI through ethical and socially just choices. AI has the power to bring humanity both great opportunities and considerable challenges, but the path it will take ultimately rests not with machines, but with human agency.